A king had a wife, Silver-Tree, and a daughter, Gold-Tree.  One day they walked by a pond, and Silver-Tree asked a trout if she were the most beautiful queen in the world, whereupon the trout said that Gold-Tree was more beautiful.  Silver-Tree took to her bed and declared she would never be well unless she ate Gold-Tree's heart and liver.  A king's son had asked to marry Gold-Tree, so her father agreed and sent them off; then he gave his wife the heart and liver of a he-goat, at which she got up from her bed.

Silver-Tree went back to the trout, which told her Gold-Tree was still more beautiful, and living abroad with a prince.  Silver-Tree begged a ship of her husband to visit her daughter.  The prince was away hunting; Gold-Tree was terrified at the sight of the ship.  The servants locked her away in a room so she could tell her mother she could not come out.  Silver-Tree persuaded her to put her little finger through the keyhole, so she could kiss it, and when Gold-Tree did, Silver-Tree stuck a poisoned thorn into it.

When the prince returned, he was grief-stricken, and could not persuade himself to bury Gold-Tree, because she was so beautiful.  He kept her body in a room.  Having married for a second time, he would not let his new wife into the room.  One day, he forgot the key, and the new wife went in.  She tried to wake Gold-Tree, and found the thorn in her finger.  Pulling it out, she revived Gold-Tree.  Because of the wakened one's identity, the second wife offered to leave, but their husband refused to allow it.

Silver-Tree went back to the trout, who told her what had happened.  Silver-Tree took the ship again.  The prince was hunting again, but the second wife said that the two of them must meet her.  Silver-Tree offered a poisoned drink.  The second wife said that it was the custom that the person who offered the drink drank of it first.  Silver-Tree put the drink to her mouth, and the second wife struck her arm so that some went into her throat.  She fell down dead.

The prince, Gold-Tree, and the second wife lived happily thereafter.