In the White Mountains, a band of eight adventurers gathers together. They are each on a personal quest for the Great Carbuncle, a brilliant gem legendary in its elusiveness. The adventurers are as follows:

The Seeker: a 60-year-old man who has sought the Carbuncle his entire life, and who plans to die alongside it once he finds it.
Doctor Cacaphodel: a European chemist, who intends to analyze the Carbuncle and publish his findings.
Master Ichabod Pigsnort: a merchant, who wishes to sell the Carbuncle to the highest bidder.
The Cynic: a bespectacled man with a constant sneer. He considers the hopes of the other adventurers futile and makes derisive comments about them. His goal is to prove that the Carbuncle does not exist by searching everywhere for it.
The Poet: a man who hopes the Carbuncle will bring him inspiration.
Lord de Vere: a wealthy prince, who wants to use the Carbuncle's brilliance as a symbol of his family's greatness for posterity.
Matthew and Hannah: newlyweds, who wish to use the gem as a light in their household and as a conversation piece.

The next morning, Matthew and Hannah wake up realizing that the others have left before them. Even though they fear they have lost the Carbuncle, they take their time in preparing for their morning's adventure. As they begin to climb a great mountain, they find themselves surrounded by the mists at its peak and fear that they will become lost. Spying a great red brilliance, though, they realize that the Carbuncle must be near and find it atop a cliff overlooking a lake. At the base of the cliff lies the Seeker, who has already died trying to reach the gem. The Cynic approaches and claims that he cannot see the Carbuncle; at Matthew's urging, he removes his spectacles and is permanently blinded by its brilliance. Matthew and Hannah decide to leave it where it is, knowing that it will overwhelm everything else in the world, and lead the Cynic down the mountain.

The story closes with an account of the other searchers' fortunes after this adventure:

 Pigsnort loses his fortune due to capture by Indians and the failure of his business.
 Cacaphodel analyzes a piece of ordinary granite from the mountain and publishes his findings – as extensive as they would have been if he had used the Carbuncle itself - in a European scientific journal.
 The Poet finds a piece of ice, which he claims is a perfect match for his idea of the Carbuncle, and is inspired by it to write bleak, cold verses.
 De Vere spends his life pondering his ancestors' greatness; when he dies, he is laid to rest among them with only torches to highlight his vanity.
 The Cynic wanders the world in desperate search of any light that he can perceive, and eventually dies in the Great Fire of London.
 Matthew and Hannah live a long and peaceful life together, often telling the tale of their search.

Conflicting reports begin to spread as to the fate of the Carbuncle. Some accounts claim that it lost its luster and became an ordinary stone; others contend that it fell into the lake, and that the Seeker's spirit can sometimes be seen bending down toward it. A few people believe that the Carbuncle still retains its original glory and venture into the mountains after it – and the narrator reveals that he is one of them.